WIP: review by phu (#9)
metafacture/metafacture-tutorial: 04_Fix-Path.md

;
```

The printed output in YAML format contains a collection of key:value pairs.

There are top level fields like: `title` or `publish_date` which contain only text values or numbers:

```YAML
---
title: "Bullshit Jobs"
```

There are also fields like `created` that contain a nested structure where the value is again a key:value pair:

```YAML
---
created:
  type: "/type/datetime"
  value: "2019-10-04T04:03:07.194846"
```

And fields like `source_records[]` do have a list as value:

```YAML
---
source_records:
- "amazon:1501143336"
- "bwb:9781501143335"
- "marc:marc_columbia/Columbia-extract-20221130-034.mrc:71583959:3725"
- "promise:bwb_daily_pallets_2023-05-10:W8-BRV-242"
```

> Metafacture Fix is using FixPath to access and selectively extract data out of YAML and JSON documents. It is JSONPath like but not identical. It also uses the dot notation but there are some differences with the path structure of arrays and repeated fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metafacture Fix is using FixPath to access and selectively extract data out of (semi) structured documents. It is JSONPath like but not identical. It also uses the dot notation but there are some differences with the path structure of arrays and repeated fields.
```

No specific to JSON or Yaml, but basically works on all formats like this except when the internal parsing is special like for MARC.

* repeated fields
* arrays

For both repeated fields and arrays you need to use an **index** to select an element. 

> For arrays specifically you also need to use an **array marker**.  

Reviewer: Is the old explanation to complex? In our workshop we made the observation that you have to highlight that different data formats handle repeated fields differently:
- simple repetition (XML)
- arrays (JSON YAML in Practice)
- or both (JSON YAML in principle)
- non at all (tabulated data)

[Append the correct last name to the three investigators: Justus Jonas, Peter Shaw and Bob Andrews. Also prepend "Investigator" to all of them.](https://metafacture.org/playground/?flux=inputFile%0A%7Copen-file%0A%7Cas-records%0A%7Cdecode-yaml%0A%7Cfix%28transformationFile%29%0A%7Cencode-json%28prettyPrinting%3D%22true%22%29%0A%7Cprint%0A%3B&transformation=&data=---%0Acreator%3A+Justus%0Acreator%3A+Peter%0Acreator%3A+Bob%0A)

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
[See here](https://metafacture.org/playground/?flux=inputFile%0A%7Copen-file%0A%7Cas-records%0A%7Cdecode-yaml%0A%7Cfix%28transformationFile%29%0A%7Cencode-json%28prettyPrinting%3D%22true%22%29%0A%7Cprint%0A%3B&transformation=append%28%22creator.1%22%2C%22+Jonas%22%29%0Aappend%28%22creator.2%22%2C%22+Shaw%22%29%0Aappend%28%22creator.3%22%2C%22+Andrews%22%29%0Aprepend%28%22creator.%2A%22%2C%22Investigator+%22%29&data=---%0Acreator%3A+Justus%0Acreator%3A+Peter%0Acreator%3A+Bob%0A)
</details>

### Working with arrays

> In JSON or YAML element repetion is possible but unusual. Instead of repeating elements an element can have a list or array of values.

Reviewer: I wanted to highlight the differnce in handling repetition.

Here is another example:

So, the path of the `red` would be: `my.color[].2`
And the path for `Peter` would be `characters[].2.name`
```YAML
my:
  colors:
    - black
    - red
    - yellow
```

There is one array type in our JSON report from our example at the beginning above and that is the `weather` field. To point to the description of the weather you need the path `weather[].1.description`.
To point to one of the colors you need to use an index but also an array marker: `[]`.

| elements  | objects | array/repeated field  |
|---|---|---|
| need path  | need dots to mark nested structure |  need index/array-wildcards to refer to specific position |
| `id`  | `title.subtitle` | `author.*.firstName` |

> | `name`  | `very.nested.element` | `my.color.2` |

Reviewer: Is this too confusing? Wanted it as an overview for different scenarios on how to  refrence different elements types.
